
                        Computer Systems
                            Project 3
                            Fall 2018


turnin id:  cs_p3


Write a C program which accepts two integers on the command-line.

The first integer is the number of pthreads that should be created by the
original, main thread.  The minimum number of threads to create will be 1
and the maximum number of threads to create will be 4.  If the command-line
arg is 4, then there will be a total of 5 threads running, including the
original thread that created the other 4.

We will refer to the value of the second integer as MAXARG below.


BE SURE TO HAVE THIS AS THE FIRST EXECUTABLE LINE IN YOUR PROGRAM:

    alarm(60)


Your makefile should link to this program on system64:

    ~rbutler/public/courses/cs/p3test.o

Note that if you make a local copy of p3test.o the build process described
below will delete it because it removes all *.o files before doing make.

p3test.o contains a function named p3test which takes one integer as an
argument and returns an integer return code which is >= 0 for valid arguments.

The goal of the program is to evaluate p3test for all integer values between 1
and MAXARG (inclusive), and to find the argument value for p3test that will
maximize the return code.  Evaluation of each argument will take several
milliseconds, typically in the neighborhood of 0.1 seconds.

The program should get near-linear speedups as the number of threads
increases from 1 to 4.

The main thread should wait for all the created threads to terminate.
Then, the main thread should print two values:
    - the argument that produced the highest return code, and
    - the highest return code

NOTE:
    Prior to the due date, p3test's highest return code will be 8888,
    but after the due date, the highest return code will become some
    other value and will be produced by a different argument.

TURNIN info:
    You should submit a tar file of a directory which contains all of the
    required files (makefile, C source files, header files, etc).
    Sample tar command to create a tar file from a dir:
	tar cvf p3.tar ./p3dir  ## do *NOT* use full pathname of the dir
    After un-tarring the project, I will cd to the dir containing it and type:
        rm -rf p3
        rm -f *.o
        make
    It should build an executable named p3.
    Then I will test it by typing commands similar to this:
        ./p3 4 100
